from hostile deserts to lonely islands
and the highest mountains
wherever there is space to expand into
humans do so
so it's hardly surprising that we're
already making preparations to set foot
on mars
and to create the first permanent colony
outside of earth
maybe even terraform another planet and
turn it into a second
blue home but wait before we can get to
the nice future stuff
we first have to complete the second
phase of colonization
creating a semi-permanent outpost to
prepare the ground for a larger human
presence
but doing so will be gruesome
even for an expansionist species like us
mars is extreme at first glance
mars seems familiar polar ice caps large
valleys
liquid water under its surface and a day
barely longer than earth's
the ideal place for us to go
unfortunately mars
is actually a cold radioactive desert
where the ground is poisonous
and breathing is impossible mars is
awful
you almost certainly don't want to go
there
the pioneers doing the hard work on mars
will have an intensely stressful life
filled with incredibly challenging
problems never encountered before
but there are plenty of people willing
to do that work and we have the
technology to enable them to do it
for this video we will assume there have
been prior missions to mars to scout out
a good place for an outpost
store resources and equipment and that
there's already a moon base that serves
as a hub for mars missions
the first major challenge for our
outpost is the fact that mars
is very energy poor because of its
distance from the sun
solar power is only 40 percent as
effective as on earth
but even this weakened sunlight is often
obscured for days by enormous dust
storms
solar power alone will probably not be
enough
alternatives such as wind power and
geothermal energy are also
unfeasible as there's hardly any
atmosphere and
mars's interior is much too cold
initially nuclear technology might be
the only option
since mars doesn't have easily
accessible radioactive element
the nuclear fuel needs to come from
earth along with the reactor
if we do set it up it could power our
small outpost for the first few years
unfortunately all that energy won't be
very useful if we can't breathe
mars's atmosphere is only one percent as
dense as earth and mostly made up of co2
so our habitats need to be pressurized
and filled with an artificial atmosphere
made of nitrogen and oxygen which comes
with more problems
corners and flat walls are weak points
so the habitats will have rounded and
smooth shapes
to handle the stress of great pressure
differences between the interior and
exterior
the airlocks need to be very airtight
and work perfectly every time
without an extensive magnetosphere or a
dense atmosphere
half of all radiation coming from space
reaches the ground
a person on the surface would be
subjected to 50 times the radiation that
they would be on earth
three years on the surface of mars
exceeds the radiation dose limits
imposed on nasa astronauts for their
entire career
this increases cancer risks
significantly
to prevent that we could shield our
habitats with a thick layer of frozen
co2
that can be harvested directly from the
atmosphere
covering the dry ice with a meter of
dirt would further increase the level of
protection
sadly this means almost no windows
from the inside most living spaces will
be windowless tunnels
from the outside they'll look like
burial mounds
all of this would still not hold back
all the radiation but reduce it just
enough to be survivable for long periods
of time
it won't however protect anyone who
ventures outside
so remote controlled robots will be used
for routine work on the surface
while our crew stays inside staying
inside is a good idea for another reason
mars dust it's much finer than dust on
earth
so it could find its way into the gears
or electronics of our machines
because it's also very dry it's
electrostatically charged
sticking to everything like spacesuits
it would be impossible to avoid carrying
lots of mars
dust into our habitat and into the lungs
of our crew
to make this even worse mars's sword is
filled with very toxic perchlorate salts
constant exposure could be deadly this
problem can still be overcome though
spacesuits for example could be made in
a way that they never truly enter the
base
but stay attached to the outside of the
habitats
okay great now we've safely isolated
humans in terms of energy and
air and protected them from cancer we
just need to feed them
water is easy to come by if a settlement
is positioned near the martian poles
with their thick layers of ice
growing food is a different kind of
challenge though
mars's soils are alkaline and lack the
vital nitrogen compounds that plants
need to grow
before we can grow anything we will have
to decontaminate the soil which is
difficult and expensive
then the soil can be fertilized using
recycled biological waste
all of this will take a lot of time and
is very energy intensive
so we might use aquaponics to raise fish
and plants together
making the astronauts diets more varied
and tasty at the same time
this will be an important psychological
boost for our overworked crew
all of these things don't solve one
fundamental problem though
mars has only 38 percent of earth's
surface gravity
which could cause muscle wasting bone
loss and
cardiovascular problems while this might
be solved in the future by setting up
rotating living spaces
for now our crew has to live with low
gravity and
exercise a lot to slow the degradation
down
the crews will probably have to rotate
every few years
after being stuck indoors in tight
spaces without windows
with the same people performing the same
routines day in day out
with little contact from the outside
world and a lot to worry about
like antarctic scientists or submarine
staff they will undergo intense
psychological screening to make sure
they're mentally resilient enough to
handle this lifestyle for several years
establishing the first real
infrastructure on mars will be
extremely taxing work that only a group
of very determined
and competent people can do luckily we
have enough of these on earth
and there you have it a small mars base
that will survive
for at least a few decades as long as
it's getting a
constant supply of resources parts
nuclear fuel
and crews from earth unfortunately mars
and earth are separated by
millions of kilometers and orbital
periods that leave only a narrow travel
window
every two years if there's an emergency
in the colony
earth wouldn't be able to help until the
next travel window opens
helpers may arrive on a planet filled
with corpses
settling mars will be the toughest
challenge we have ever faced
it will be gruesome work to establish
the infrastructure we need
but we're stubborn and we like extreme
challenges
if we push through phase two of
colonization anything is possible
cities illuminating the dark martian
night a hub for travel between the
planets
industries setting foot in orbit
terraforming a true multi-planetary
future
going to mars is hard but worth it
and if we're lucky we might be around
long enough to see it happening
and cheer on the people who take on
these challenges
for the benefit of us all
figuring out complex stuff is one of the
best feelings ever
especially if you don't have to do it
all by yourself our friends from
brilliant can help you out with that
part
brilliant is a problem-solving website
with a hands-on approach
instead of just dropping tricky concepts
in front of you they help you unravel
them bit by bit
and build up to an interesting
conclusion this way
science becomes something you actually
do actively
and not only hear about with brilliant
you can bear down on dozens of
interesting courses and puzzles about
topics like solar energy
gravity and astronomy if you visit
brilliant.org
nutshell or click the link in the
description you can sign up for free and
learn
all kinds of things and as a bonus for
quartz gazak viewers
the first 688 people will also get 20
off their annual membership with
brilliant you finish your day
a little bit smarter and no mars dust to
deal with
we promise can't get enough of mars
we've also made a poster about it you
can learn some more about the hardships
of mars colonization
or just look at the pretty colours go
get it here
[Music]
me